Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Last time
we introduced poly numbers, which are simpler
versions of polynomials. Today we're going to
talk about elementary arithmetic with these new
objects. So I remind you of the basic setup: we
have the positive numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on.
We said last time that a positive poly number
is an object created from a list of positive
numbers written vertically with a bracket on top.
That defines a new type of mathematical object,
poly num plus. So it's like a positive number but
a positive poly number. I should say, perhaps,
that this list is by definition non-empty, so
it must have at least one entry in the list.
We'll say that if we order the elements p0, p1
down to pk, then this is the zeroth coefficient,
this is the first coefficient, and so on. P sub i
is the i-th coefficient of P, and we're starting
our indexing at 0 up at the top. In a little bit
of abbreviated notation, instead of writing this
big list like this, we'll just write P equals
P sub i. We'll say that the degree of our poly
number is the largest index K which has a non-zero
coefficient. So we read down to the last fellow
which is non-zero, and the degree is the index.
The zero polynomial right, so we will not talk
about the degree of the zero polynomial. I
remind you of our convention for equality:
if you have a poly number, you're allowed to add
zeroes at the bottom of it, and we say it has not
changed to add zeros or, if necessary, subtract
zeros. We can say that another way by saying that
P sub i can be considered to be zero if the
index r happens to be bigger than the degree.
Here's a definition of addition of two
polynomials: so here's one poly number P,
and here's another poly number Q. The coefficients
are P sub i here and Q sub i. Then we say that the
sum is the poly number R whose i-th coefficient
is just the sum of the i-th coefficients of P and
Q. For example, to add this poly number to this
one, we add the zeroth coefficients, we add the
1 coefficients, the 2 coefficients, and the 3
coefficients. The 3 coefficient here is zero,
so we're adding zero to this 7. Another example,
even simpler: the poly number 11 plus the poly
number 7 equals the poly number 18. So we see that
ordinary addition of numbers is kind of contained
in this arithmetic of poly numbers, just by
looking at very simple ones of degree zero.
And then it's not too hard to see that addition
satisfies the commutative law, and it satisfies
the associative law, and that if you add the zero
polynomial to any poly number P, you get back P.
Addition is easy; multiplication is a little
bit less easy. Okay, so here's the definition
of multiplication of two polynomials, which I hope
you figured out from the examples I gave you last
time. So here's one poly number P and another
poly number Q. Then their product, P times Q,
is the new poly number R whose i-th coefficient is
given by this expression. Let's have a close look
at it, it's very important. It's the sum over
all positive numbers k and l that add up to i,
the sum over all those k's, P sub k times Q sub l.
So we're multiplying one coefficient from P times
one coefficient from Q, and we have to choose the
indices so that they add up to our given index i,
and we add up all those possible products
over all such possible indices. So here's
a very simple example: three times two equals
six. So here the zeroth coefficient times the
zeroth coefficient here is the zeroth coefficient
here. Let's have a look over here: poly number 4,
1 times the poly number 3, 7. To find the zero
coefficient of the result, we look at the zeroth
coefficient here times the zeroth coefficient here
because zero plus zero is the only way of getting
two numbers adding up to zero. We get 12. When we
look at the first coefficient, so this would be i
equals 1, then we have to look at all pairs of the
indices that add up to 1. So we could take 0, 1;
they add up to 1, or 1, 0. And the corresponding
products are 4 times 7 plus 1 times 3. We add them
together, we get 28 plus 3 is 31. How about
when i is equal to 2? What coefficients add
up to 2? What about 1 plus 1? That equals 2.
Okay, so we have to take that product 1 times
7. So here's a little bit more complicated: 1,
1, 0, 2 times 3, 1. For the zeroth coefficient,
it's the product of these two. The first
coefficient is this times this plus this
times this. This coefficient is this times this
plus this times this plus this times this. The
two coefficients that add up have to add up to
2. And this one here, that's when i equals 3,
we can get that by taking this times this, which
is 0 here, plus this times this, that's also 0,
plus 2 times 1, that's 2, plus 0, so we get a
2. But we also get a coefficient from i equals 4
because that's the result when k is 2 and l equals
2. This times this equals 8. That's multiplication
of two polynomials, and it satisfies some various
laws: the commutative law, the associative law,
a distributive law with respect to addition. And
note that I'm using the usual convention that
multiplication takes priority over addition, so
you have to multiply these two first, you multiply
these two, and then you add these two resulting.
And also P times the poly number 1 is just P.
So in fact, you are very familiar with this kind
of multiplication but in a slightly different
form. Let's illustrate that by looking at this
particular example. So convince yourself that
the poly number 3, 1 times the poly number 2,
3 is 6, 11, 3. 2 times 3 is 6, 9 plus 2 is 11,
and 0 plus 3 plus 0 is 3. Now that computation
is reflected in the ordinary way in which we
multiply the Hindu-Arabic numbers 13 times
32. 13, 32. Because one way, a very naive way,
of thinking about how this product works is to
take, well, this is 2 times 3, which is 6, that's
the ones result. How many tens do we get when we
multiply? Well, there's 2 times this 10, that's 2
tens there, and there's also 3 times this 3 tens,
which is another nine tens, so altogether there
are 11 tens that result. And how many hundreds are
there? Well, we get hundreds by taking this 10 and
multiplying it by these three tens, 1 times 3 is 3
hundreds. So the product of these two numbers is 6
ones, 11 tens, and 3 hundreds. Now, we know that
we don't usually leave it in this form because we
don't like to have numbers bigger than nine in any
one spot, so we would convert this 11 tens into
1 hundred and 10 tens, giving us altogether
416. But if we left it at this stage here,
then we would have exactly what we got when
we multiply the corresponding polynomial.
Multiplication is really not much different from
the way you multiply two numbers ordinarily in
the Hindu-Arabic system. And of course, this
multiplication reflects the usual multiplication
of two polynomials. If we take the polynomial
3 plus x and the polynomial 2 plus 3x, now we
multiply them together using the distributive
law. We get 6, the number of x's is 2 plus 9,
that's 11, and the number of x squared is 1 times
3, which is 3. So that's the point of it all. We
are mimicking what happens with polynomials but
we're doing so in a way that does not involve x's.
Next time, we're going to look at
arithmetic with poly numbers in even
more detail. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.